Citation Info: Zhang, Yanwei (2013). Likelihood-based and Bayesian Methods for Tweedie Compound Poisson Linear Mixed Models, Statistics and Computing, 23, 743-757. 

## Likelihood-based and Bayesian Methods for Tweedie Compound Poisson Linear Mixed Models 

Yanwei Zhang actuary ~~z~~ hang@hotmail.com 

## **Abstract** 

The Tweedie compound Poisson distribution is a subclass of the exponential dispersion family with a power variance function, in which the value of the power index lies in the interval (1 _,_ 2). It is well known that the Tweedie compound Poisson density function is not analytically tractable, and numerical procedures that allow the density to be accurately and fast evaluated did not appear until fairly recently. Unsurprisingly, there has been little statistical literature devoted to full maximum likelihood inference for Tweedie compound Poisson mixed models. To date, the focus has been on estimation methods in the quasi-likelihood framework. Further, Tweedie compound Poisson mixed models involve an unknown variance function, which has a significant impact on hypothesis tests and predictive uncertainty measures. The estimation of the unknown variance function is thus of independent interest in many applications. However, quasi-likelihood-based methods are not well suited to this task. This paper presents several likelihood-based inferential methods for the Tweedie compound Poisson mixed model that enable estimation of the variance function from the data. These algorithms include the likelihood approximation method, in which both the integral over the random e↵ects and the compound Poisson density function are evaluated numerically; and the latent variable approach, in which maximum likelihood estimation is carried out via the Monte Carlo EM algorithm, without the need for approximating the density function. In addition, we derive the corresponding Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm for a Bayesian formulation of the mixed model. We demonstrate the use of the various methods through a numerical example, and conduct an array of simulation studies to evaluate the statistical properties of the proposed estimators. 

**Keywords:** Adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature, Extended quasi-likelihood, Laplace approximation, Monte Carlo EM, Maximum likelihood estimation, Mixed models, Penalized quasilikelihood, Tweedie compound Poisson distribution. 

1 

## **1 Introduction** 

The exponential dispersion model (Jørgensen 1987) plays an important role in modern applied data analysis, as it is the underlying response distribution in many commonly used statistical models. A two-parameter representation of the exponential dispersion model is 

**==> picture [323 x 27] intentionally omitted <==**

where _a_ and __ are known functions, _✓_ is the natural parameter and _φ >_ 0 is the dispersion parameter. For this family of distributions, we have the well-known relationships _E_ ( _y_ ) = _µ_ = _[0]_ ( _✓_ ) and _V ar_ ( _y_ ) = _φ[00]_ ( _✓_ ) (e.g., see McCullagh and Nelder 1989). Since the mapping from _✓_ to _µ_ is one-toone (Barndor↵-Nielsen 1978), _[00]_ ( _✓_ ) can also be represented as a function of _µ_ , denoted by _V_ ( _µ_ ). This is generally known as the variance function, which uniquely defines an exponential dispersion model (Jørgensen 1987). 

The paper focuses on the exponential dispersion model with a power variance function _V_ ( _µ_ ) = _µ[p]_ , in which the value of the index parameter _p_ lies in the interval (1 _,_ 2). This particular distribution is generated by a compound Poisson-Gamma distribution and has a probability mass at the origin accompanied by a skewed continuous distribution on the positive real line. Henceforth we refer to it as the Tweedie compound Poisson distribution, or simply the compound Poisson distribution. Extensive applications of this distribution, mainly in the context of generalized linear models [GLM], have been found in a wide range of fields where continuous data with exact zeros regularly arise. Dunn and Smyth (2005) give an excellent account of the various areas where the Tweedie compound Poisson distribution has been applied. 

Nevertheless, it is well known that the normalizing quantity _a_ ( _y, φ, p_ ) (we express the normalizing quantity as _a_ ( _y, φ, p_ ) to emphasize its dependence on the index parameter _p_ ) for the compound Poisson distribution is not analytically tractable, and the density of the compound Poisson distribution cannot be expressed in a closed form. Numerical methods that enable accurate and fast evaluation of the density function did not appear until fairly recently (Dunn and Smyth 2005, 2008). Not surprisingly, implementations of the compound Poisson mixed models, to date, have been limited to the penalized quasi-likelihood [PQL] method (Breslow and Clayton 1993), in which the inferential scheme only requires knowledge of the first two moments. Nevertheless, before the PQL method can be applied, the variance function, i.e., the index parameter, must be determined. In many applications, the value of the index parameter is specified beforehand based on expert judgment. This is only acceptable when the goal of the study is to estimate regression coefficients, upon which the variance function has negligible e↵ects (e.g., see Davidian and Carroll 1987, Dunn and Smyth 2005). Problems arise when statistical inference goes beyond mere regression coefficient estimation. For example, in their paper on variance function estimation, Davidian and Carroll (1987) state, “how well one models and estimates the variances will have substantial impact on prediction and calibration based on the estimated mean response” and “far from being only a nuisance 

2 

parameter, the structural variance parameter can be an important part of a statistical analysis”. Indeed, the study of Peters _et. al_ (2009) shows that estimation of the index parameter in the Tweedie compound Poisson GLM is of special interest to the insurance industry, as it has a material impact on the uncertainty measures of the predicted outstanding liability, a critical element used in strategic planning, accounting and risk management by insurance companies. 

Methods that enable estimation of the index parameter have appeared for generalized linear models, in which the index parameter is determined by maximizing the profile extended quasilikelihood (Cox and Reid 1987, Nelder and Pregibon 1987), or the profile likelihood evaluated using the density approximation methods (Dunn and Smyth 2005, 2008). However, two issues complicate implementing these in the PQL-based compound Poisson mixed models. First, an inherent difficulty with the extended quasi-likelihood approach is that it cannot handle exact zero values and requires the response variable to be adjusted away from zero by adding an small positive number (see Nelder and Pregibon 1987). However, Dunn and Smyth (2005) point out that this adjustment is inappropriate for modeling the compound Poisson data, as the parameter estimates are extremely sensitive to the choice of the adjustment. We experience a similar problem when applying the penalized extended quasi-likelihood method to the compound Poisson mixed model. Second, the underlying objective function optimized in PQL is not truly an approximation of the likelihood function (Pinheiro and Chao 2006), which precludes its use in the profile likelihood to make inference of the index parameter. 

The intractable density function and the unknown variance function have presented distinct challenges to statistical inference problems involving compound Poisson mixed models. In this paper, we derive several likelihood-based methods for compound Poisson mixed models that enable estimation of the variance function. Given the recent development in numerical approximation of the compound Poisson density, existing inference methods for mixed models using Laplace approximation (Tierney and Kadane 1986) and adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature [AGQ] (Liu and Pierce 1994) can be modified and implemented. These methods evaluate the likelihood by approximating the integral over the distribution of the random e↵ects. The approximated likelihood is then optimized numerically to produce parameter estimates. In many existing mixed models, the normalizing quantity in (1.1) does not enter the likelihood to be maximized either because it is simply a constant involving no parameters (e.g., Bernoulli, Poisson and Binomial), or because it is a function of only the dispersion parameter which can be profiled out of the likelihood (e.g., Normal). In contrast, the Laplace and quadrature approximations of the compound Poisson mixed model must take into account the normalizing quantity, as it depends, in a complicated way, on both the dispersion parameter and the index parameter, whose values are to be estimated from the numerical optimization. 

The dependence of the above likelihood approximation methods on the compound Poisson density implies that they are subject to the degree of accuracy of the density approximation methods, and further, they will fail when the underlying compound Poisson density evaluation methods encounter numerical difficulties. For example, the series evaluation method of Dunn and Smyth 

3 

(2005) may fail to work in certain regions of parameter space where the number of terms required to approximate the density to a given level of accuracy is prohibitively large. We consider an alternative method that treats the unobserved Poisson variable implicit in the compound Poisson distribution, as well as the model’s random e↵ects, as latent variables (Laird and Ware 1982). The corresponding maximum likelihood estimation can be carried out via the Monte Carlo EM [MCEM] algorithm (Wei and Tanner 1990, McCulloch 1997). This latent variable approach avoids the need to approximate the compound Poisson density numerically. Rather, a Monte Carlo expectation step is implemented in which samples of the latent variables are drawn from the conditional distribution of the latent variables on the observed data. 

In addition, we derive the Markov Chain Monte Carlo [MCMC] (Gelman _et. al_ 2003) method, providing a Bayesian formulation of the compound Poisson mixed model (Zeger and Karim 1991). Corresponding to the above frequentist methods, there are two ways of implementing the MCMC algorithm: one relying on direct compound Poisson density approximation and the other exploiting latent variables. The MCEM and MCMC methods are more general than their likelihood approximation method counterparts: they can accommodate various random e↵ect structures or random e↵ects from non-Normal distributions. However, by their Monte Carlo nature, they are more computationally demanding and subject to Monte Carlo errors. 

Details of these algorithms will be presented in section 3 after a brief review of the compound Poisson distribution and the density approximation method in section 2. Section 4 will apply the proposed algorithms to a data set analyzed in Dunn and Smyth (2005). In section 5, we conduct a series of simulation studies to investigate the statistical properties of the proposed algorithms. Section 6 will provide concluding comments. 

## **2 The compound Poisson distribution** 

In this section, we review the compound Poisson distribution considered in the paper. In particular, we describe the series evaluation method (Dunn and Smyth 2005) to approximate the intractable density function, which is required by certain likelihood-based estimation routines presented in the next section. 

## **2.1 The compound Poisson distribution as an exponential dispersion model** 

It can be shown (e.g., see Jørgensen 1987) that the exponential dispersion model, with _V_ ( _µ_ ) = _µ[p]_ for some known value of _p 2_ (1 _,_ 2), collapses to a compound Poisson-Gamma random variable 

4 

generated in the following way: 

**==> picture [358 x 33] intentionally omitted <==**

where _Pois_ ( _λ_ ) denotes a Poisson random variable with mean _λ_ , and _Ga_ ( _↵, γ_ ) denotes a Gamma random variable with mean and variance equal to _↵γ_ and _↵γ_[2] , respectively. Implicit in this definition is that if _T_ = 0 then _Y_ = 0, thereby allowing the distribution to have a probability mass at the origin. When _T >_ 0, the response variable _Y_ is the sum of _T_ i.i.d Gamma random variables, implying that _Y |T ⇠ Ga_ ( _T↵, γ_ ). As a result, the compound Poisson distribution has a probability mass at zero accompanied by a skewed continuous distribution on the positive real line. This distinctive feature makes it ideally suited for modeling continuous data with exact zeros that frequently arise in many applied fields. Indeed, for certain applications, there is some intuitive appeal to exploit this distribution, where the underlying data can be considered as generated by a compound process. For example, 

- in actuarial science, _Y_ is the aggregate claim amount for a covered risk, _T_ the number of reported claims and _Xi_ the insurance payment for the _ith_ claim; 

- in rainfall modeling, _Y_ is the total amount of precipitation in a given period, _T_ the number of rain events and _Xi_ the intensity of the precipitation for the _ith_ rain event; 

- in ecological studies of stock abundance, _Y_ is the total biomass in a certain area, _T_ the number of patches of organisms and _Xi_ the measured biomass for the _ith_ patch. 

By means of deriving and equating the cumulant generating functions for (1.1) and (2.1), we can work out the relationship between the two sets of parameters in the two representations as: 

**==> picture [375 x 86] intentionally omitted <==**

## **2.2 Numerical approximation to the density function** 

From (2.1), the joint distribution of the compound Poisson and the Poisson variables can be derived as 

**==> picture [412 x 35] intentionally omitted <==**

5 

To recover the marginal distribution of _Y_ , we integrate out _T_ in (2.3), that is, _p_ ( _y|λ, ↵, γ_ ) = P _1t_ =0 _[p]_[(] _[y, t][|][λ, ↵, γ]_[).] Equating this with (1.1) and canceling out common terms, we obtain the normalizing quantity in (1.1) as 

**==> picture [381 x 31] intentionally omitted <==**

It is well known (e.g., see Dunn and Smyth 2005) that the above formula for the normalizing quantity does not have a closed-form expression. However, methods have been proposed that can approximate it reasonably well. Dunn and Smyth (2005) show that as a function of _t_ , (2.4) is strictly convex, and that _Wt_ decays faster than geometrically on either side of the mode of _Wt_ , denoted _t_ max. As a result, we can replace the infinite sum with finite sum over important terms. That is, we can find the limits _tL < t_ max and _tU > t_ max such that _WtL_ and _WtU_ are less than _✏Wt_ max for some given threshold _✏_ , and evaluate the normalizing quantity as 

**==> picture [288 x 34] intentionally omitted <==**

Using the Stirling’s formula to replace the Gamma function in (2.4), and taking the derivative with respect to _t_ , we can find the approximate mode _t_ max as 

**==> picture [276 x 27] intentionally omitted <==**

We evaluate the formula for _Wt_ in (2.4) at _t_ max to obtain _Wt_ max, which is then used to determine the two limits _tL_ and _tU_ . 

The above series evaluation method is fairly straightforward to implement, however, Dunn and Smyth (2005) note that the number of terms required to approximate the density to a given accuracy could increase without bound in certain regions. An alternative approach (Dunn and Smyth 2008) evaluates the density by Fourier inversion of the characteristic function, and has better performance in these situations. Nevertheless, the more complex Fourier inversion method does not dominate the series evaluation approach universally, as it has been found to be less accurate in other certain parameter domains. In general, these two methods are regarded as complementary. 

## **3 Compound Poisson linear mixed models** 

In this section, we consider statistical inference of the compound Poisson linear mixed model. Suppose that there are _N_ observations. The mixed model assumes that the _N ⇥_ 1 mean response vector _**µ**_ is stipulated by some linear predictors through a monotonic link function _⌘_ as 

**==> picture [280 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

6 

**==> picture [203 x 172] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
φ<br>σb<br>β1<br>β0<br>1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9<br>variance power<br>2<br>1<br>0<br>−1<br>parameter estimate<br>−2<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 1: Estimates of the two fixed-e↵ects ( _β_ 0 and _β_ 1), the variance component ( _σb_ ) and the dispersion parameter ( _φ_ ) using the penalized quasi-likelihood method with a given variance power _p_ = 1 _._ 1 _,_ 1 _._ 2 _, · · · ,_ 1 _._ 9. 

where _**β**_ is a _J ⇥_ 1 vector of e↵ects, _**b**_ a _K ⇥_ 1 vector of random e↵ects, and _**X**_ and _**Z**_ are the associated design matrices. Moreover, the random e↵ects have their own distribution 

**==> picture [267 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

This is the typical setup in a mixed model. We have seen in section 2.1 that for a given _p_ , the compound Poisson distribution is a member of the exponential dispersion family. In such a case, existing inferential procedures developed for the exponential dispersion family (e.g., McCulloch and Searle 2001) can be readily applied. However, the index parameter _p_ is generally unknown beforehand, in which the compound Poisson distribution can no longer be expressed in the form of the exponential dispersion family. Methods that enable estimation of the index parameter along with other parameters of interest must be employed. 

Existing theory (e.g., Smyth 1996) suggests that for the compound Poisson model, the mean _**µ**_ is orthogonal to _p_ and _φ_ , meaning that the mean, and thus the regression coefficients _**β**_ and _**b**_ , vary slowly as _p_ and _φ_ change. For this reason, it is perhaps reasonable to specify the index parameter based on expert judgment when the goal of the study is solely to estimate regression coefficients. However, problems arise when statistical inference goes beyond mere regression coefficient estimation, as the index parameter significantly impacts the estimation of the dispersion parameter, which, in turn, has a substantial influence on the estimation of asymptotic standard errors of the regression coefficients, statistical hypothesis tests, and predictive uncertainty measures. 

7 

**==> picture [382 x 172] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5<br>adjustment adjustment<br>1.8 10<br>9<br>1.6<br>8<br>p φ<br>1.4 7<br>6<br>1.2<br>5<br>1.0<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 2: Plot of the estimates of the index parameter ( _p_ ) and the dispersion parameter ( _φ_ ) corresponding to seven di↵erent adjustments adopted in the penalized extended quasi-likelihood method. 

The impact of the index _p_ on the estimation of the other parameters in a mixed model is illustrated in Figure 1, in which we fit nine compound Poisson mixed models to a real data set using the penalized quasi-likelihood method [PQL] for each value of _p 2 {_ 1 _._ 1 _,_ 1 _._ 2 _, · · · ,_ 1 _._ 9 _}_ . The parameter estimates of the two fixed e↵ects ( _β_ 0 and _β_ 1), the variance component ( _σb_ ) and the dispersion parameter ( _φ_ ) are then plotted against the value of the index parameter used. From Figure 1, it is noteworthy that the value of the index parameter has a significant impact on the estimation of the dispersion parameter, but only a slight e↵ect on the estimation of the mean parameters and the variance component. 

The penalized quasi-likelihood method, however, is not equipped to estimate the variance function. A natural modification, the extended quasi-likelihood (Nelder and Pregibon 1987), can be exploited, in which the PQL is used to estimate the fixed and random e↵ects, the variance component and the marginal deviance for a given value of _p_ , and the resulting profiled extended quasi-likelihood is maximized to produce the estimate of _p_ . Unfortunately, the extended quasi-likelihood involves a term log( _V_ ( _y_ )), which will become infinite if _y_ = 0. To overcome this issue, the observed zeros are adjusted away from the origin by adding a small positive constant _c_ . However, this adjustment is inappropriate for the compound Poisson distribution because the resulting parameter estimates are extremely sensitive to the choice of the adjustment. For example, Figure 2 shows the estimates of the parameter _p_ and _φ_ corresponding to six di↵erent values of _c_ used in the penalized extended quasi-likelihood method [PEQL]. 

8 

We see that the penalized extended quasi-likelihood method su↵ers from the dependency on the ad hoc adjustment and is not well suited for estimating the variance function in the compound Poisson mixed model. In the following, we derive several likelihood-based methods that enable the variance function to be estimated from the data. Further, in contrast to the PQL method, these methods are approximations to the true likelihood, thus permitting the construction of likelihood ratio tests for comparing nested models. 

## **3.1 Laplace approximation** 

For convenience in deriving the conditional mode of the random e↵ects needed in the following, we further express the variance component in (3.2) in terms of the relative covariance factor **⇤** such that 

**==> picture [263 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

As a result, the specification of the mean vector in (3.1) can be further expressed as 

**==> picture [319 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

where _**u** ⇠ N_ ( **0** _, φ_ _**I**_ ). 

Given this formulation, we have two sets of random variables, the observation _**Y**_ and the unobserved (scaled) random e↵ects _**u**_ , and we are interested at estimating the set of parameters **⇥** = ( _**β** , φ, p,_ **⇤** ). These parameters are estimated by maximizing the observed likelihood, that is, the marginal likelihood where the random e↵ects are integrated out from the joint likelihood of ( _**Y** ,_ _**u**_ ): 

**==> picture [357 x 25] intentionally omitted <==**

Since the integral in (3.5) is often intractable, we evaluate it via the Laplace approximation (Tierney and Kadane 1986), in which the integrand in (3.5) is replaced by its second-order Taylor series at the conditional mode of _**u**_ given the current value of **⇥** . The resulting marginal likelihood is a function of only **⇥** , which can be maximized using numerical optimization procedures to find the maximum likelihood estimate of **⇥** . 

The conditional mode of _**u**_ can be located via the widely used Fisher’s scoring algorithm, often referred to as the penalized iteratively re-weighted least squares in the context of mixed models (e.g., Bates _et. al_ 2012). To derive the conditional mode, we first note that the joint loglikelihood of ( _**Y** ,_ _**u**_ ) is: 

**==> picture [389 x 34] intentionally omitted <==**

9 

where log _p_ ( _yi|_ _**u** ,_ **⇥** ) is the conditional loglikelihood of the data given the random e↵ects. Since the conditional distribution of _**u**_ is proportional to the joint distribution of ( _**Y** ,_ _**u**_ ), the conditional mode of _**u**_ can be located by maximizing the joint loglikelihood in (3.6) with respect to _**u**_ . We denote _g_ ( _µ_ ) = _@⌘/@µ_ . From (3.6), we can compute the derivative of the joint loglikelihood with respect to _ur_ , the _rth_ element of _**u**_ , as 

**==> picture [283 x 72] intentionally omitted <==**

Therefore, the gradient can be expressed, in matrix notation, as 

**==> picture [340 x 26] intentionally omitted <==**

where _**g**_ ( _**µ**_ ) is an _N ⇥ N_ diagonal matrix whose _ith_ diagonal element is _g_ ( _µi_ ) and _**W**_ is an _N ⇥ N_ diagonal matrix whose _ith_ diagonal element _wii_ satisfies _wii[−]_[1] = _g_ ( _µi_ )[2] _V_ ( _µi_ ). Di↵erentiating (3.7) again with respect to _**u**[0]_ and taking expectation with respect to the distribution of _**Y**_ , we can approximate the Hessian matrix as 

**==> picture [348 x 27] intentionally omitted <==**

where _**L**_ is the Cholesky factor of _**Z**[⇤][0]_ _**W Z**[⇤]_ + _**I**_ . With (3.7) and (3.8), we can define an iterative scheme that eventually leads to the conditional mode of _**u**_ , where the update of _**u**_ in each iteration is given by 

**==> picture [386 x 23] intentionally omitted <==**

In the above, the weight matrix _**W**_ and the mean response _**µ**_ are updated in each iteration based on the value of _**u** old_ . As a result of the definition in (3.3), the dispersion parameter from (3.7) and (3.8) cancels out and does not enter the scoring algorithm. This is similar to the scoring algorithm in generalized linear models (McCullagh and Nelder 1989). Convergence of the above scoring algorithm is declared when the relative change in the linear predictors falls below a threshold. 

Denoting the found conditional mode as _**u**_ ˆ, we estimate the variance of _**u**_ ˆ by inverting the negative approximated Hessian matrix as 

**==> picture [289 x 16] intentionally omitted <==**

10 

With the conditional mode and the approximate Hessian matrix, we compute the Laplace approximation of the marginal loglikelihood as 

**==> picture [342 x 60] intentionally omitted <==**

In many existing mixed models, the conditional loglikelihood log _p_ ( _yi|_ **⇥** _,_ ˆ _**u**_ ) is often replaced by half of the deviance residuals (McCullagh and Nelder 1989), and the normalizing quantity in (1.1) is left out either because it is simply a constant with no parameters in it (e.g., Bernoulli, Poisson and Binomial), or because it involves only the dispersion parameter which can be profiled out of the marginal likelihood (e.g., Normal). The normalizing quantity in the compound Poisson distribution, however, depends on both the dispersion parameter and the index parameter in a complicated way, and it must be computed numerically and included in the conditional likelihood. The marginal loglikelihood in (3.11) is then maximized numerically to produce the estimate of **⇥** , subject to the constraints: _φ >_ 0, _p 2_ (1 _,_ 2) and _diag_ ( **⇤** ) _>_ 0. 

## **3.2 Adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature** 

When there are no crossed random e↵ects, the integral in (3.5) can also be approximated using the more accurate adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature [AGQ] (Liu and Pierce 1994), which replaces the integral by a weighted sum of the integrand at specified knots. These knots are zeros of the Hermite polynomial, but are transformed so that the integrand is sampled in an appropriate region. When there is only one knot, the AGQ method collapses to the Laplace approximation. 

Specifically, an _L_ -knot AGQ approximation to the integral of a general function _g_ ( _t_ ) is 

**==> picture [342 x 33] intentionally omitted <==**

where _xl_ and _wl_ are the pre-determined zeros and the corresponding weights of the Hermite polynomial, and _µ_ ˆ and _σ_ ˆ are the mode of _g_ ( _t_ ) and the square root of the variation of _g_ ( _t_ ) at its mode, respectively. 

For simplicity in the formulation, we suppose there is a single grouping factor with _K_ levels so that there is only one random e↵ect _uk_ for each level. Then the data can be partitioned into _K_ groups so that each group is conditionally independent to each other given the random e↵ects. We denote _p_ ( _**y** k, uk|_ **⇥** ) as the joint density of the observations and the random e↵ect for group _k_ , so that the joint likelihood can be written as _p_ ( _**y** ,_ _**u** |_ **⇥** ) =[Q] _[K] k_ =1 _[p]_[(] _**[y]** k[, u][k][|]_ **[⇥]**[).][Therefore,][the][AGQ] 

11 

approximation to (3.5) is 

**==> picture [384 x 72] intentionally omitted <==**

ˆ ˆ ˆ where _uk_ is the conditional mode and _σuk_ = _[p] φ/Lkk_ is the standard deviation of _uk_ , as found in (3.9) and (3.10). 

## **3.3 Monte Carlo EM** 

The above two methods approximate the integral in (3.5) explicitly and in computing the marginal likelihood, they rely on the capability to directly evaluate the density function of the compound Poisson distribution. The Monte Carlo EM [MCEM] algorithm (Wei and Tanner 1990) to be presented here is fundamentally distinct in that latent variables are employed and direct compound Poisson density evaluation is avoided. Therefore, it is independent of the degree of accuracy in the density approximation. Moreover, it is a general-purpose optimization procedure that can handle flexible random e↵ect specifications. For example, the distribution of the random e↵ects are not necessarily limited to be Normal. For this reason, we specify the distribution of the random e↵ects as _p_ ( _**b** |_ **⌃** ), depending on some unknown parameter **⌃** , and re-define **⇥** = ( _**β** , φ, p,_ **⌃** ). Throughout the next two subsections, we use the unscaled random e↵ects _**b**_ instead of the scaled version _**u**_ used in the previous two subsections. 

In the MCEM algorithm, both the unobserved Poisson variable _**T**_ implicit in the compound Poisson distribution and the random e↵ects _**b**_ are treated as latent variables. Thus, the complete data is ( _**Y** ,_ _**T** ,_ _**b**_ ), and the corresponding joint loglikelihood can be derived as 

**==> picture [349 x 33] intentionally omitted <==**

Using the joint distribution of ( _Y, T_ ) in (2.3), and plugging the expression for ( _µi, φ, p_ ) in (2.2), the first term in (3.14) can be further expressed as 

**==> picture [404 x 74] intentionally omitted <==**

12 

**==> picture [322 x 32] intentionally omitted <==**

In the above, the constant term involving only _y_ ’s has been dropped out. 

In the E-step of the EM algorithm, given the current value of the parameters, **⇥** _old_ , we take the expectation of (3.14) with respect to the conditional distribution of the latent variables ( _**T** ,_ _**b**_ ) given the observed data (we refer to this as the posterior distribution in the following discussion): 

**==> picture [321 x 13] intentionally omitted <==**

However, the expectation with respect to the posterior distribution of ( _**T** ,_ _**b**_ ) is intractable. We can resort to a Monte Carlo approach to evaluate it via simulated values from the posterior distribution. Suppose that we have _M_ simulated samples from the posterior distribution of ( _**T** ,_ _**b**_ ), then (3.16) can be approximated by 

**==> picture [336 x 33] intentionally omitted <==**

where _**t**_[(] _[m]_[)] and _**b**_[(] _[m]_[)] are the _mth_ simulated sample. In particular, we note that _ti_ and _µi_ are additive in (3.15), implying that the posterior distributions of the two latent variables _**T**_ and _**b**_ are independent. Therefore, simulations of _**T**_ and _**b**_ can be performed separately. The simulation of _**T**_ from the posterior is relatively straightforward by noting that it factorizes over _i_ and each _ti_ can be simulated using rejection sampling (e.g., see Robert and Casella 2004). The posterior distribution for _**b**_ is more involved, and depending on the form of _p_ ( _**b** |_ **⌃** ), either rejection sampling (Booth and Hobert 1999) or Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods (McCulloch 1997) can be used. 

ˆ In the subsequent M-step, a new estimate of **⇥** is found by maximizing the Monte Carlo estimate _Q_ ( **⇥** ; **⇥** _old_ ). The conditional maximization approach in Meng and Rubin (1993) is used so that we can update each component of **⇥** sequentially. To update _**β**_ , we use the iterative Newton-Raphson approach from McCulloch (1997): 

**==> picture [372 x 15] intentionally omitted <==**

where _**W**_ and _**g**_ ( _**µ**_ ) are as defined in (3.7) and computed using the value of **⇥** _old_ . The notation _E_[ˆ] represents the Monte Carlo estimate of the expectation. The update of _φ_ also has a closed-form solution: 

**==> picture [363 x 35] intentionally omitted <==**

The maximization over **⌃** is often simple and the solution depends on the form of _p_ ( _**b** |_ **⌃** ) and the structure of **⌃** . For example, if _**b**_ is Normally distributed and **⌃** = _σ_[2] _**I**_ , then _σnew_[2][=] _K_[1] _[E]_[ˆ] _**[b]**[|]_ _**[Y]**_[ (] _**[b]**[0]_ _**[b]**_[).] 

13 

Maximization of _p_ is achieved through a constrained optimization procedure with the restriction _p 2_ (1 _,_ 2). 

The E-step and M-step as described in the above will be implemented iteratively and the algorithm will converge to a local maximum (e.g., see Wei and Tanner 1990). 

## **3.4 Markov Chain Monte Carlo** 

Markov Chain Monte Carlo [MCMC] is another popular approach to handling mixed models, in which the model is formulated in a Bayesian setting and inference is made based on simulated samples from the posterior distribution of the parameters. The MCMC approach is also a general algorithm that can accommodate various random e↵ect structures or random e↵ects from non-Normal distributions. To make inference for the set of parameters **⇥** = ( _**β** , φ, p,_ **⌃** ), we draw simulated samples from the posterior distribution of **⇥** given the data. The simulation is implemented through a Gibbs sampler (Gelman _et. al_ 2003), which sequentially samples parameters from their lower-dimensional full conditional distributions over many iterations. 

There are two ways in formulating the model based on whether the latent Poisson variable is employed. The first approach does not utilize the latent Poisson variable and similar to the likelihood approximation methods, it must make direct evaluation of the conditional distribution of the data on the random e↵ects. That is, we estimate the posterior distribution of ( **⇥** _,_ _**b**_ ) as: 

**==> picture [327 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

where _p_ ( **⇥** ) is the prior distribution for **⇥** . An alternative approach, similar to the MCEM algorithm above, makes use of the latent Poisson variable and computes the joint posterior distribution of ( **⇥** _,_ _**T** ,_ _**b**_ ) as 

**==> picture [336 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

density function by simulating the latent variables from the full conditionals. In both cases, we draw simulations from the joint posterior, maintain the simulated values of **⇥** , and make inference about **⇥** based on these simulated samples. 

Indeed, the MCEM algorithm has a close relationship with the latter Gibbs sampler. By setting _M_ = 1 in the E-step, we obtain one simulated sample of _**T**_ and _**b**_ from the posterior. Then, we replace each step in the M-step with one simulated sample from the full conditionals. This constitutes one iteration in the Gibbs sampling. 

14 

|Plant<br>Stock<br>Spacing|Inner zone<br># Samples<br>Mean RLD|Outer zone<br># Samples<br>Mean RLD|All<br># Samples<br>Mean RLD|
|---|---|---|---|
|1<br>Mark<br>5x3<br>2<br>Mark<br>5x3<br>3<br>Mark<br>4x2<br>4<br>Mark<br>4x2<br>5<br>MM106<br>5x3<br>6<br>MM106<br>5x3<br>7<br>M26<br>4x2<br>8<br>M26<br>4x2|40<br>0.080<br>35<br>0.061<br>26<br>0.061<br>26<br>0.112<br>36<br>0.123<br>34<br>0.106<br>24<br>0.100<br>24<br>0.146|51<br>0.019<br>51<br>0.011<br>18<br>0.006<br>15<br>0.029<br>49<br>0.053<br>47<br>0.099<br>17<br>0.098<br>18<br>0.061|91<br>0.046<br>86<br>0.032<br>44<br>0.039<br>41<br>0.082<br>85<br>0.083<br>81<br>0.102<br>41<br>0.099<br>42<br>0.110|



Table 1: The number of samples and the mean of the root length density [RLD] by plant, root stock, plant spacing and root zone. 

## **4 Illustrative examples** 

In this section, we demonstrate the use of the compound Poisson mixed model using the root data set from the study conducted by de Silva _et. al_ (1999). The study examines possible factors that may a↵ect the length density of fine roots, the main component of the root system through which vascular plants absorb water and nutrients. Specifically, the aim of their study is to investigate how the distribution of fine root length density [RLD] is a↵ected by the geometry of the structural root system and the type of the root stock. Data are collected on eight apple trees, which are grafted onto one of three di↵erent root stocks (Mark, MM106 and M26) and planted at two di↵erent between-row _⇥_ within-row spacings (4 _⇥_ 2 meters and 5 _⇥_ 3 meters). For each of the apple trees, a number of soil core sampling units are taken from which the fine roots are extracted. The total length of the fine roots in each core sample is measured, and the RLD is calculated by dividing the total length ( _cm_ ) of the fine roots by the volume of the core sample ( _cm_[3] ). Each of these samples is further classified as belonging to an inner or outer zone relative to each plant. 

An exploratory data analysis is presented in Table 1, in which the number of samples in the data and the sample mean of the RLD are shown by tree, root stock, plant spacing and root zone. It is apparent that this study is not a full factorial design: the Mark root stock is tested at both plant spacings but the MM106 stock only at the 5 _⇥_ 3 spacing and the M26 stock only at the 4 _⇥_ 2 spacing. Further, for each of the plants, the observed sample mean RLD is much larger in the inner zone than that in the outer zone, this di↵erence being greater for the Mark stock than the other two. 

A distinct feature of this data is that the variable of primary interest, the RLD, has a mixed distribution: 37.8% of the RLD data are exact zeros while the rest take positive continuous values. The zeros are corresponding to the soil core samples that contain no fine roots, and accurately modeling the probability of zero RLD is considered an important part of the study. Noting that 

15 

no transformation to normality is likely to be successful for this data due to the large proportion of zeros, Dunn and Smyth (2005) exploit the compound Poisson generalized linear model in their analyses. They specify a model including the stock and zone e↵ects, the factors of primary interest in the study, as well as their interactions. After these e↵ects are accounted for, the contribution from plant and spacing is not significant. 

Dunn and Smyth (2005) find that the above model provides reasonable estimates of the stock and zone e↵ects and is helpful to capture the observed pattern of zeros, but further comment that “a more complete treatment of this data might include fitting a generalized linear mixed model with plant as a random e↵ect”. Indeed, plant is a blocking factor in the randomized block design of de Silva _et. al_ (1999), and thus, engenders a source of variation that must be accounted for when conclusions are drawn about the population, rather than about these particular plants themselves. Further, including plant as a random e↵ect will account for the correlation induced due to multiple samples from the same plant. 

_Laplace and adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature_ . The above mixed model is most conveniently handled using the `cpglmm` function available in the R package `cplm` , which provides the Laplace and adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature methods to estimate the compound Poisson mixed model. For example, the following estimates the model using a 15-knot adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature: 

## `fit <- cpglmm(RLD ~ Stock * Zone + (1 | Plant), data = FineRoot, nAGQ = 15)` 

## The Laplace method is invoked when the number of quadrature knots is set to one ( `nAGQ = 1` ). 

_Monte Carlo EM_ . In the MCEM algorithm, we draw simulations of both the latent Poisson variable _**T**_ and the random e↵ects _**b**_ via rejection sampling. A zero-truncated Poisson proposal distribution is exploited when producing samples of the latent Poisson variable _**T**_ , while a multivariate t-distribution with 6 degrees of freedom is used for sampling the random e↵ects _**b**_ . The mean and variance of the multivariate t-distribution are chosen to match the mode and curvature of the posterior _p_ ( _**b** |_ _**y**_ ), respectively. The sample size is set to 100 for the first 40 iterations, and increased to 3 _,_ 000 thereafter. To ensure that the algorithm is not stopped prematurely due to Monte Carlo errors, we perform three separate runs, each starting at a distinct set of initial values. The convergence history of each parameter is monitored and shown in Figure 3 (for the mean parameters, only the plots for _β_ 0 - _β_ 2 are included). It can be seen that within the first 40 iterations, all parameters have reached the neighborhood of the corresponding maximum likelihood estimates, which are from the 15-knot quadrature estimation and represented by the horizontal dashed gray lines. At convergence, all three runs result in parameter estimates with three-decimal accuracy, indicating that Monte Carlo errors are unlikely to be influential in the resulting statistical inference. To achieve higher accuracy, however, the number of Monte Carlo samples needed may be prohibitively large. Alternatively, one could construct an automated algorithm that increases the number of the simulated samples as the algorithm progresses by gauging the approximate Monte Carlo error in each iteration (Booth and Hobert 1999). 

16 

**==> picture [354 x 211] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
β0 β1 β2<br>−1.0 0.05<br>0.00 −0.46<br>−1.5<br>−0.05 −0.48<br>−2.0 −0.10<br>−0.50<br>−0.15<br>−2.5 −0.52<br>−0.20<br>−3.0 −0.25 −0.54<br>φ p σb<br>1.8<br>1.5 1.7<br>0.6<br>1.6<br>1.0<br>1.5 0.4<br>1.4<br>0.5 0.2<br>1.3<br>1.2<br>20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100<br>iterations<br>parameter estimate<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 3: The iteration history for three runs of the MCEM algorithm with distinct starting values. 

_Markov Chain Monte Carlo_ . To implement the MCMC procedure, we formulate the model in a Bayesian setting. In particular, prior distributions for all parameters must be specified. In order to allow the parameters to be estimated largely from the data, non-informative priors are exploited: _βj ⇠ N_ (0 _,_ 100[2] ), _j_ = 0 _, · · · ,_ 5, _φ ⇠ U_ (0 _,_ 100), _p ⇠ U_ (1 _,_ 2), and _σb[−]_[2] _⇠ Ga_ (0 _._ 001 _,_ 1000). Because of the conjugate Gamma prior, the posterior conditional distribution of _σb[−]_[2] is still Gamma, for which samples could be directly generated. We implement the MCMC algorithm with direct density approximation in (3.20), and use the random walk Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (Gelman _et al._ 2003) for simulations of _βj_ , _j_ = 0 _, · · · ,_ 5, _bk_ , _k_ = 1 _, · · · ,_ 8, _φ_ and _p_ , in which a preliminary run with 5,000 iterations is used to tune the variances of the Normal proposal distributions so that the acceptance rate for each parameter is about 50%. The samples from this preliminary run are discarded and not used in the analysis. We then run 25,000 iterations in three parallel chains, discarding the burn-in period of the first 5,000 iterations at which point the approximate convergence is achieved (the potential scale reduction factors of Gelman and Rubin 1992, are below 1.1 for all parameters). To reduce autocorrelation, we use every 20th iteration of each chain. This results in 1,000 simulation draws per chain and 3,000 simulated samples in total. Inference is then made using these simulated sample values. 

The corresponding parameter estimates from these algorithms are exhibited in Table 2, where the numbers in parentheses are the estimated standard errors. Estimates from the penalized extended quasi-likelihood approach are also included for comparison, in which a constant _c_ = 0 _._ 001 is added to the zeros when making inference of the index parameter. In all these models, the inner zone and the root stock M26 serve as the reference level and their estimates are fixed as zero. We see 

17 

||PEQL<br>Laplace<br>AGQ<br>MCEM<br>MCMC|
|---|---|
|_β_0<br>_β_1<br>_β_2<br>_β_3<br>_β_4<br>_β_5<br>_φ_<br>_p_<br>_σb_|-2.096(0.18)<br>-2.098(0.17)<br>-2.097(0.17)<br>-2.097(0.17)<br>-2.102(0.22)<br>-0.068(0.24)<br>-0.066(0.22)<br>-0.067(0.22)<br>-0.066(0.23)<br>-0.066(0.30)<br>-0.462(0.22)<br>-0.463(0.20)<br>-0.463(0.20)<br>-0.464(0.20)<br>-0.462(0.27)<br>-0.447(0.29)<br>-0.447(0.26)<br>-0.447(0.26)<br>-0.447(0.27)<br>-0.443(0.26)<br>0.028(0.36)<br>0.026(0.31)<br>0.026(0.31)<br>0.025(0.35)<br>0.013(0.32)<br>-1.168(0.36)<br>-1.166(0.32)<br>-1.166(0.32)<br>-1.166(0.34)<br>-1.168(0.32)<br>0.599<br>0.329<br>0.329<br>0.329<br>0.338<br>1.554<br>1.413<br>1.413<br>1.413<br>1.418<br>0.063<br>0.088<br>0.088<br>0.088<br>0.158|



Table 2: Parameter estimates ( _β_ 0 - Intercept, _β_ 1- MM106, _β_ 2 - Mark, _β_ 3 - Outer, _β_ 4 - Outer:MM106, _β_ 5 - Outer:Mark) for the root length density data using di↵erent estimation methods. Approximate standard errors for the fixed e↵ects are reported in parentheses. 

that the estimates across the three likelihood-based algorithms, i.e., Laplace, AGQ and MCEM, are highly consistent, with negligible di↵erence within the first three decimal places. By comparison, the penalized extended quasi-likelihood approach produces noticeably di↵erent estimates except for the fixed e↵ects. The discrepancy for the dispersion _φ_ and the index _p_ is expected given that their estimates depend on the value of the constant _c_ . In addition, the MCMC estimates are comparable to the other estimates expect for the variance component, for which the estimate is almost twice as large. This di↵erence is likely because the likelihood-based methods tend to underestimate the variance component when the number of groups is small (8 plants in the example), as is shown in the simulation study in the next section. An advantage of the Bayesian approach is that posterior distributions of all quantities are readily available. For example, Figure 4 shows the posterior distribution of the index parameter from the MCMC simulations. We see that the value of the index parameter mainly lies in the interval (1 _._ 35 _,_ 1 _._ 5). Moreover, the parameter estimates suggest that the estimated RLD is much smaller in the outer zone ( _β_ 3) than that in the inner zone - the average RLD in the outer zone is about exp( _−_ 0 _._ 447) = 64% of that in the inner zone, which is consistent with the exploratory results in Table 1. However, this e↵ect is only marginally significant (outside one standard deviation but within two standard deviations from the origin) in the presence of the interaction terms. For the root stock e↵ect, roots with Mark stock ( _β_ 2) tend to have significantly lower RLD, averaged at about 30% of that from the other two root stocks, while root stock MM106 ( _β_ 1) and M26 are not statistically distinguishable. 

18 

**==> picture [205 x 174] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
1.35 1.40 1.45 1.50<br>value of p<br>15<br>Density 10<br>5<br>0<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 4: Posterior distribution of the index parameter from the MCMC approach. 

## **5 Simulation studies** 

In this section, we conduct two sets of simulation studies to evaluate the statistical properties of the proposed algorithms for the compound Poisson mixed model. In the first study, we consider the Laplace and adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature methods, and compare them with the widely used penalized quasi-likelihood algorithm. The simulation is based on simulated covariates, and the aim is to investigate the performance of the proposed likelihood approximation estimators in di↵erent settings. The second study uses the fine root data set analyzed in the last section and includes the latent variable approach and the MCMC algorithm. 

## **5.1 Simulation study I** 

It is understood that the performance of mixed model estimation procedures can depend on such factors as the magnitude of the variance component and the number of groups/clusters corresponding to the random e↵ects. For this reason, we design and implement two pairs of simulations, each pair allowing only one of the variance component ( _σb_ ) and the number of groups ( _g_ ) to take contrasted values while controling all the other factors. This gives rise to four simulation scenarios in total as below: 

**==> picture [144 x 11] intentionally omitted <==**

19 

1-b: _g_ = 20, _σb_ = 1, _p_ = 1 _._ 5; 

2-a: _g_ = 5, _σb_ = 1, _p_ = 1 _._ 5; 

2-b: _g_ = 100, _σb_ = 1, _p_ = 1 _._ 5; 

The aim is to investigate not only the general performance of the likelihood approximation estimators, but also how and to what extent the performance may be influenced by the above factors. For example, comparing the results from 2-a and 2-b enables us to examine the e↵ect of the number of groups on the variance component estimation. 

In all simulations, the sample size of each simulated data set is set to _N_ = 500, and for each simulation study, a covariate _x_ simulated from a standard Normal distribution is included as the sole predictor in addition to the intercept. The true parameter values associated with the intercept and the covariate are set to _**β**_ = ( _β_ 0 _, β_ 1) _[0]_ = ( _−_ 1 _,_ 1) _[0]_ , and the dispersion is set to _φ_ = 1. They are held constant across all simulations. To create a simulation data set, we simulate the random e↵ects from a Normal distribution with standard deviation _σb_ given in each of the above scenarios, compute the expected values of the response variable using (3.1) with a logarithmic link function, based on the simulated random e↵ects and the given values of _**β**_ , and generate the response variable from the Tweedie compound Poisson distribution according to (2.1) and (2.2). For each simulation scenario, we create _S_ = 200 data sets as above. For each data set, we fit a compound Poisson mixed model with _x_ as the predictor using PQL, Laplace and AGQ, respectively. For the PQL approach, the true value of the index parameter in each scenario is used. The PEQL approach is not adopted mainly because its dependence upon the adjustment of the zeros could severely contaminate the comparison. For the AGQ algorithm, seven knots are specified, which proves to provide sufficient accuracy for most simulated data sets in the study. Running the simulation in each scenario results in _S_ = 200 estimates of each parameter (say _✓_ ). We summarize the simulation result by the average value ( _✓_[ˆ] =[P] _[S] i_ =1 _[✓][i][/S]_[),][the][relative][estimation][bias][((ˆ] _[✓][−][✓]_[)] _[/✓]_[)][and][the][mean] square error ([P] _[S] i_ =1[(] _[✓][i][ −][✓]_[)][2] _[/S]_[).][These][statistics][are][reported][in][Table][3.] 

Several conclusions emerge from these reported statistics. First, all algorithms produce relatively little or no bias in the estimation of the fixed e↵ects _**β**_ , where the bias is generally below 6%. In addition, the estimates of the dispersion _φ_ and the index _p_ are unbiased under the Laplace and AGQ methods, the biases across all scenarios being smaller than 2%. The conclusion for the variance component, however, appears to depend on several factors. Most notably, the result tends to strongly relate to the magnitude of the variance component: for scenario 1-a with a small variance component ( _σb_ = 0 _._ 1), the bias is as high as 20% for the Laplace and AGQ algorithms while this bias essentially disappears for _σb_ = 1 in scenario 1-b ( _σb_ = 1). In addition, when there is a small number of groups ( _g_ = 5 in 2-a), the bias could be considerably large, more than 16% in most cases. On the other hand, increasing the number of groups to 20 (1-b) or 100 (2-b) leads to almost unbiased estimates. 

20 

|Model|_β_0<br>_β_1<br>_φ_<br>_p_<br>_σb_|_β_0<br>_β_1<br>_φ_<br>_p_<br>_σb_|
|---|---|---|
||Average estimate||
|True<br>PQL<br>Laplace<br>AGQ7|1-a: _σb_ = 0.1<br>-1.000<br>1.000<br>1.000<br>1.500<br>0.100<br>-1.003<br>1.002<br>0.985<br>0.080<br>-1.005<br>1.002<br>0.992<br>1.498<br>0.079<br>-1.003<br>1.002<br>0.992<br>1.498<br>0.079|1-b: _σb_ = 1<br>-1.000<br>1.000<br>1.000<br>1.500<br>1.000<br>-1.014<br>1.001<br>0.932<br>0.988<br>-1.027<br>1.001<br>0.992<br>1.498<br>0.993<br>-1.012<br>1.001<br>0.993<br>1.498<br>0.987|
|True<br>PQL<br>Laplace<br>AGQ7|2-a: _g_ = 5<br>-1.000<br>1.000<br>1.000<br>1.500<br>1.000<br>-0.960<br>1.002<br>0.980<br>0.838<br>-0.963<br>1.002<br>0.997<br>1.498<br>0.839<br>-0.960<br>1.002<br>0.997<br>1.498<br>0.838|2-b: _g_ = 100<br>-1.000<br>1.000<br>1.000<br>1.500<br>1.000<br>-1.026<br>0.999<br>0.788<br>1.034<br>-1.058<br>1.000<br>0.989<br>1.498<br>1.002<br>-1.002<br>0.999<br>0.990<br>1.499<br>0.998|
||Relative estimation bias (%)||
|PQL<br>Laplace<br>AGQ7|1-a: _σb_ = 0.1<br>0.333<br>0.187<br>-1.529<br>-19.837<br>0.514<br>0.201<br>-0.784<br>-0.133<br>-20.987<br>0.315<br>0.199<br>-0.786<br>-0.133<br>-20.848|1-b: _σb_ = 1<br>1.354<br>0.134<br>-6.758<br>-1.166<br>2.717<br>0.118<br>-0.767<br>-0.164<br>-0.724<br>1.194<br>0.118<br>-0.732<br>-0.160<br>-1.298|
|PQL<br>Laplace<br>AGQ7|2-a: _g_ = 5<br>-4.038<br>0.168<br>-2.035<br>-16.228<br>-3.657<br>0.179<br>-0.329<br>-0.133<br>-16.096<br>-4.045<br>0.179<br>-0.326<br>-0.132<br>-16.245|2-b: _g_ = 100<br>2.567<br>-0.057<br>-21.204<br>3.351<br>5.830<br>-0.045<br>-1.070<br>-0.146<br>0.185<br>0.176<br>-0.139<br>-0.969<br>-0.096<br>-0.223|
||Mean square error||
|PQL<br>Laplace<br>AGQ7|1-a: _σb_ = 0.1<br>0.431<br>0.348<br>0.690<br>0.733<br>0.434<br>0.347<br>0.442<br>0.041<br>0.706<br>0.428<br>0.347<br>0.442<br>0.041<br>0.708|1-b: _σb_ = 1<br>5.922<br>0.305<br>1.019<br>2.791<br>6.022<br>0.306<br>0.562<br>0.046<br>2.822<br>5.891<br>0.306<br>0.562<br>0.046<br>2.778|
|PQL<br>Laplace<br>AGQ7|2-a: _g_ = 5<br>19.446<br>0.259<br>0.818<br>12.945<br>19.484<br>0.258<br>0.614<br>0.042<br>12.944<br>19.441<br>0.258<br>0.614<br>0.042<br>12.945|2-b: _g_ = 100<br>1.722<br>0.375<br>4.831<br>1.995<br>2.004<br>0.374<br>0.725<br>0.045<br>1.056<br>1.598<br>0.373<br>0.718<br>0.044<br>0.995|



Table 3: Average values of parameter estimates, relative estimation biases (in 100s) and mean square errors (in 100s) under di↵erent estimation algorithms in each of the four simulation scenarios. 

21 

We also note that using the true value of _p_ , the PQL method produces average estimates that are consistent with those from the likelihood-based methods. However, the estimates of the variance component and the dispersion in PQL are worse than those from the likelihood-based methods, as measured by the mean square errors. In some scenario (e.g., 2-b), the mean square errors of PQL are twice as large as those of the likelihood-based methods. The di↵erence would have been even larger if we had allowed the index to be estimated from the data. As for the fixed e↵ects, PQL is inferior to the quadrature method while slightly more accurate than the Laplace approximation. Comparison of the two likelihood-based methods reveals that the AGQ approach outperforms the Laplace approximation in estimating the fixed e↵ects, reducing both the bias and the mean square error of the Laplace approximation almost across all scenarios. Such improvement is most noticeable when the number of groups and the variance component are large (2-b), in which the 7-knot AGQ reduces about 25% of the mean square error of the Laplace approximation. Nevertheless, it is not guaranteed that the AGQ method yields more accurate random component estimation. The two likelihood-based methods tend to have comparable performance in most scenarios, with the Laplace approximation producing somewhat smaller mean square errors of the variance component in two scenarios of the simulation study. In addition, the two methods perform equally well in estimating the dispersion and the index parameters, resulting in almost identical mean square errors in all scenarios. Lastly, we observe that for such application as 2-a where precise estimation of parameters is difficult due to insufficient between-group information, all three methods tend to have similar performance. 

## **5.2 Simulation study II** 

and investigate the performance of computationally demanding algorithms such as the MCEM method, which is based on latent variables, and the MCMC method, which is formulated in the Bayesian setting. We set the true values of the fixed e↵ects ( _**β**_ ) to be the maximum likelihood estimates from Table 2, and ( _φ, p, σb_ ) _[0]_ = (0 _._ 3 _,_ 1 _._ 5 _,_ 1) _[0]_ . We simulate 100 data sets, and in each data set the response variable is generated in the same fashion as described in the first simulation study. For each simulated data set, we fit the compound Poisson mixed model using three algorithms: AGQ, MCEM and MCMC. We use the quadrature method as a reference model. The MCEM algorithm is run similarly as in the example section: we use 100 samples for the first 40 iterations and 3,000 samples thereafter. For the MCMC method, we use a preliminary run of 2,000 iterations to tune the proposal variances in the random walk Metropolis algorithm, after which we run another 11,000 iterations in one chain, burin in the first 1,000 iterations and draw one sample every 10th iteration. The posterior sample medians are then used to make inference of the parameters. 

We summarize the simulation result by the average value, the relative estimation bias, and the mean square error as before, and report these statistics in Table 4. We first notice that there are large relative biases for some of the fixed e↵ects. However, this is mainly because the true values of 

22 

|Model|_β_0<br>_β_1<br>_β_2<br>_β_3<br>_β_4<br>_β_5<br>_φ_<br>_p_<br>_σb_|
|---|---|
||Average estimate|
|True<br>AGQ7<br>MCEM<br>MCMC|-2.100<br>-0.070<br>-0.460<br>-0.450<br>0.030<br>-1.170<br>0.300<br>1.500<br>1.000<br>-2.160<br>-0.058<br>-0.368<br>-0.403<br>-0.020<br>-1.209<br>0.295<br>1.495<br>0.745<br>-2.165<br>-0.056<br>-0.368<br>-0.403<br>-0.020<br>-1.209<br>0.295<br>1.495<br>0.746<br>-2.130<br>-0.116<br>-0.429<br>-0.408<br>-0.014<br>-1.204<br>0.302<br>1.499<br>1.051|
||Relative estimation bias (%)|
|AGQ7<br>MCEM<br>MCMC|2.875<br>-16.962<br>-20.014<br>-10.425<br>-165.596<br>3.315<br>-1.559<br>-0.301<br>-25.469<br>3.101<br>-20.440<br>-19.894<br>-10.425<br>-165.627<br>3.319<br>-1.566<br>-0.302<br>-25.439<br>1.422<br>65.891<br>-6.825<br>-9.325<br>-148.087<br>2.905<br>0.689<br>-0.061<br>5.142|
||Mean square error|
|AGQ7<br>MCEM<br>MCMC|45.648<br>98.131<br>54.648<br>4.714<br>6.737<br>6.790<br>0.074<br>0.037<br>14.658<br>45.809<br>98.470<br>54.912<br>4.715<br>6.740<br>6.793<br>0.074<br>0.037<br>14.641<br>67.822<br>161.714<br>73.568<br>4.760<br>6.817<br>6.843<br>0.078<br>0.036<br>19.867|



Table 4: Average values of parameter estimates, relative estimation biases (in 100s) and mean square errors (in 100s) under di↵erent estimation algorithms in the second simulation study. 

As a second measure, we also compute the absolute biases for the fixed e↵ects, the maximum of which is indeed less than 0 _._ 1. Additionally, the maximum likelihood estimates of the variance component are downwardly biased (25%) because there are only a small number of groups corresponding to the random e↵ects. In contrast, the MCMC method appears not to su↵er much from this and generates a markedly accurate estimate of the variance component, the bias being about 5%. This result is in line with that of Browne and Draper (2006), which finds that the Bayesian estimate of the variance component is approximately unbiased in Normal hierarchical models. Indeed, all parameter estimates from the MCMC method are less biased than those from the likelihood-based methods, except for the fixed e↵ect _β_ 1. Nevertheless, judged by the mean square errors, the Bayesian estimates are not necessarily better. This is perhaps due to the Monte Carlo errors inherent in the MCMC procedure. For example, Figure 5 shows the distribution of the estimates of the parameter _σb_ from the quadrature and MCMC methods. We see that a large portion of the AGQ estimates are below the true value. In contrast, the distribution of the MCMC estimates is centered around the true value, but more spread out and thick-tailed. 

## **6 Discussion and conclusion** 

The intractable density function and the unknown variance function have presented considerable challenges to statistical inference problems involving compound Poisson mixed models. To date, the focus has been on estimation methods within the quasi-likelihood framework. While fast and easy to 

23 

**==> picture [229 x 178] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
1.2<br>1.0<br>model<br>0.8<br>AGQ7<br>0.6<br>MCMC<br>0.4<br>0.2<br>0.0<br>0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0<br>σb<br>density<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 5: The distribution of the estimated variance component under the AGQ and MCMC algorithms in the simulation study. 

implement, the penalized quasi-likelihood method is not equipped to estimate the variance function. This can have a considerable impact on hypothesis tests and parameter uncertainty measures in the compound Poisson mixed models. The natural modification utilizing the extended quasi-likelihood, however, cannot yield accurate and robust estimation of the variance function owing to the ad hoc adjustment of observed zeros in order to make the method feasible. 

In contrast with the quasi-likelihood-based methods, this paper has presented several likelihoodbased inferential algorithms that enable estimation of the variance function. These methods can be further categorized into two groups: the likelihood approximation method and the latent variable approach. Implementing the likelihood approximation methods, such as the Laplace approximation and the adaptive Gauss-Hermite quadrature, relies on the capability to numerically evaluate the compound Poisson density. In contrast, the latent variable approach avoids direct density evaluation. Rather, maximum likelihood estimation is carried out via the Monte Carlo EM algorithm. However, since the E-step in the EM algorithm involves simulating latent variables for Monte Carlo approximations, the algorithm can be computationally intensive. Implementation of importance sampling can reduce this computational cost by retaining old samples for use in later iterations. A related point is the Monte Carlo error inherent in the simulation-based method. Failing to account for this could cause the algorithm to stop prematurely and has the risk of making incorrect inference. This risk can be controlled by gauging the Monte Carlo error as in Booth and Hobert (1999) and Levine and Casella (2001) and increasing the number of Monte Carlo samples as the algorithm converges. Further, the Monte Carlo EM algorithm has a close relationship with Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods, and can be turned into a Gibbs sampler with minor modifications. 

24 

Compared to the likelihood approximation methods, the Monte Carlo EM and Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods can accommodate more general random e↵ect structures or random e↵ects from non-Normal distributions. Bayesian formulation and estimation of the mixed models also have the advantage to account for all sources of variability and produce posterior predictive distributions that are of considerable utility for formal decision making problems. However, these computationally demanding algorithms are less suited to large-scaled data problems, compared to the likelihood approximation methods. The Laplace approximation is markedly fast, reasonably accurate and widely applicable for a range of model structures. The quadrature method, on the other hand, relies heavily on the compound Poisson density evaluation and is considerably slower. It will become exceedingly slow when there are multiple random e↵ects and lots of quadrature knots, because of the need for a large number of density evaluations. 

We have also demonstrated the use of these algorithms through a numerical example, and conducted an array of simulation studies to evaluate their performance. We have found that the likelihood approximation methods are essentially unbiased for the fixed e↵ects, the dispersion parameter and the index parameter, and perform substantially better than the penalized quasi-likelihood method in estimating the variance component. However, they could still produce downwardly biased estimation of the variance component when there is a small number of groups or the variance component is small. In these situations, the MCMC estimates based on posterior medians are generally less biased. 

In situations where there is potentially large bias in the maximum likelihood estimation of the variance component, it is necessary to modify the estimation procedure by including bias-correction adjustments (e.g., Liao and Lipsitz 2002). For normal linear mixed models, such bias can be e↵ectively corrected using the restricted maximum likelihood [REML] (Patterson and Thompson 1971). Extensions of the REML-type estimation to non-normal models generally fall in the framework of bias correction for profile estimating equations (McCullagh and Tibshirani 1990, Jørgenson and Knudsen 2004). Notably, Liao and Lipsitz (2002) derive the bias-corrected profile score equation for the variance component in generalized linear mixed models. Their bias correction procedure also relies on the MCEM algorithm, and when applied to the compound Poisson mixed models, it amounts to adjusting the expectation in (3.17) by a Monte Carlo estimate of the bias-correction term. 

A note is that the likelihood approximation methods presented here, namely, the Laplace approximation and the adaptive Guass-Hermite quadrature methods, can be readily modified to work for the exponential dispersion model _V_ ( _µ_ ) = _µ[p]_ with _p >_ 2. In this case, we evaluate the conditional likelihood _p_ ( _**y** |_ _**u**_ ) using the density approximation methods derived for _p >_ 2 in Dunn and Smyth (2005, 2008) and set the constraint in the numerical optimization to be _p >_ 2. 

25 

## **7 References** 

1. Barndor↵-Nielsen, O. (1978). _Information and Exponential Families in Statistical Theory_ . Chichester: Wiley. 

2. Bates D., M¨achler M. and Bolker B. (2012). Fitting linear mixed-e↵ects models using lme4, _Journal of Statistical Software_ , _forthcoming_ . 

3. Booth, J. G., and Hobert, J. P. (1999). Maximizing Generalized Linear Mixed Model Likelihoods with an Automated Monte Carlo EM Algorithm. _Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B_ , 61, 265-285. 

4. Breslow, N.E. and Clayton, D.G. (1993). Approximate Inference in Generalized Linear Mixed Models. _Journal of the American Statistical Association_ , 88 (421): 9-25. 

5. Browne, W. J., and Draper, D. (2006). A comparison of Bayesian and likelihood-based methods for fitting multilevel models. _Bayesian Analysis_ , 1(3), 473-514. 

6. Cox, D. R. and Reid, N. (1987). Parameter orthogonality and approximate conditional inference. _Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B_ , 49, 1-39. 

7. Davidian, M. and Carroll, R. J. (1987). Variance function estimation. _Journal of the American Statistical Association_ , 82, 1079-1091. 

8. de Silva, H. N., Hall, A. J., Tustin, D. S. and Gandar, P. W. (1999). Analysis of distribution of root length density of apple trees on di↵erent dwarfing rootstocks. _Annals of Botany_ , 83: 335-345. 

9. Dunn, P.K. and Smyth, G.K. (2005). Series evaluation of Tweedie exponential dispersion models densities. _Statistics and Computing_ , 15, 267-280. 

10. Dunn, P.K. and Smyth, G.K. (2008). Evaluation of Tweedie exponential dispersion model densities by Fourier inversion. _Statistics and Computing_ , 18, 73-86. 

11. Gelman, A. and Rubin, D. B. (1992). Inference from iterative simulation using multiple sequences (with discussion). _Statistical Science_ 7, 457-511. 

12. Gelman, A., Carlin, J. B., Stern, H. S., and Rubin, D. B. (2003). _Bayesian Data Analysis_ . London: Chapman and Hall. 

13. Jørgensen, B. (1987). Exponential dispersion models (with discussion). _Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B_ , 49: 127-162. 

14. Jørgensen, B. and Knudsen S. J. (2004). Parameter Orthogonality and Bias Adjustment for Estimating Functions. _Scandinavian Journal of Statistics_ , 31, 93-114. 

15. Laird, N.M. and Ware, J.H. (1982). Random-e↵ects models for longitudinal data. _Biometrics_ , 38, 963-974. 

16. Levine R. A. and Casella G. (2001). Implementations of the Monte Carlo EM Algorithm. _Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics_ , 10:3, 422-439. 

17. Liao J. G. and Lipsitz S. R. (2002). A type of restricted maximum likelihood estimator of variance components in generalised linear mixed models. _Biometrika_ , 89, 2, 401-409. 

26 

18. Liu Q. and Pierce D.A. (1994) A Note on Gauss-Hermite Quadrature, _Biometrika_ , 81, 3, 624-629. 

19. McCullagh, P. and Nelder, J.(1989). _Generalized Linear Models_ , Boca Raton: Chapman and Hall. 

20. McCullagh, P. and Tibshirani, R. (1990). A simple method for the adjustment of profile likelihoods. _Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B_ , 52, 325-344 

21. McCulloch, C. E. (1997). Maximum likelihood algorithms for generalized linear mixed models. _Journal of the American Statistical Association_ , 92, 162-170. 

22. McCulloch, C. E. and Searle, S. R. (2001). _Generalized, Linear and Mixed Models_ . John Wiley & Sons. 

23. Meng, X-L. and Rubin, D.B. (1993). Maximum likelihood estimation via the ECM algorithm: A general framework. _Biometrika_ , 80 (2): 267-278. 

24. Nelder, J.A. and Pregibon, D. (1987). An extended quasi-likelihood function. _Biometrika_ , 74: 221-232. 

25. Patterson, H. D. and Thompson R. N. (1971). Recovery of inter-block information when block sizes are unequal. _Biometrika_ , 58, 545-554. 

26. Peters G. W., Shevchenko P. V. and Wuthrich M. V. (2009). Model Uncertainty in Claims Reserving within Tweedie’s Compound Poisson Models. _ASTIN Bulletin_ , 39(1), 1-33. 

27. Pinheiro, J. C. and Chao, E. C. (2006). Efficient Laplacian and Adaptive Gaussian Quadrature Algorithms for Multilevel Generalized Linear Mixed Models. _Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics_ , 15, 1, 58-81. 

28. Robert, C.P. and Casella, G. (2004). _Monte Carlo Statistical Methods_ . New York: SpringerVerlag. 

29. Smyth, G.K. (1996). Regression analysis of quantity data with exact zeros. Proceedings of the Second Australia-Japan Workshop on Stochastic Models in Engineering, Technology and Management. Technology Management Centre, University of Queensland, pp. 572-580. 

30. Tierney, L. and Kadane J. B. (1986), Accurate Approximation for Posterior Moments and Marginal Densities, _Journal of the American Statistical Association_ , 81, 82-86. 

31. Wedderburn, R. W. M. (1974). Quasi-likelihood functions, generalized linear models and the Gauss-Newton method. _Biometrika_ , 61, 439-47. 

32. Wei, G. C. G., and Tanner, M. A. (1990). A Monte Carlo Implementation of the EM Algorithm and the Poor Man’s Data Augmentation Algorithms. _Journal of the American Statistical Association_ , 85, 699-704. 

33. Zeger, S. L. and Karim R. M. (1991). Generalized Linear Models With Random E↵ects; A Gibbs Sampling Approach. _Journal of the American Statistical Association_ , 86, 413, 79-86. 

27 

